content/blog/productivity/workflowy-strategy/index.md, before:

---
description: How I'm currently using WorkFlowy to be more productive
---

# My WorkFlowy strategy



Are you new to WorkFlowy?

I have a few strategies.

To clear up, MultiFlow is really useful! Open a few panels and navigate to the relevant projects, then copy and paste stuff out.

To stay clear, every project has an “Inbox”.

```
+- Some project            <-- this is the project
  +- Inbox: [Some project] <-- this is the inbox (it also links to the project!)
  | +- Idea 1
  | +- Idea 2
  +- Some node
  +- Another node
  +- ...
```

An Inbox is a top level node where I dump messy thinking and ideas.

It contains a label “Inbox” as well as a link to the parent node (will explain why in a minute!).

I then mirror inboxes from projects to my main to do list:

```
+- Todos
  +- Today
  | +- Tidy the house 
  | +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]
    +- Inbox: [Another project]
    +- ...
```

If I want to add stuff to a project, I just toggle the inbox open and add the ideas:

```
+- Todos
  +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]  <-- open Inbox without moving away
    | +- Idea 1
    | +- Idea 2
    | +- Another new idea!    <-- then add thoughts as I have them
    +- Inbox: [Another project]
    +- ...
```

And if I think I need to work on the actual project, I can click the link:

```
+- Todos
  +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]  <-- click the link
    | +- Idea 1
    | +- Idea 2
    | +- Another new idea!
    +- ...
```

And the project becomes the main tree:

```
+- Some project
  +- Inbox: [Some project]
  | +- Idea 1
  | +- Idea 2
  | +- Another new idea!
  +- Some node
  +- Another node
  +- ...
```

A little off topic but have

Commit message:

Migrate to alert component and tree formatting

content/blog/productivity/workflowy-strategy/index.md, after:

---
description: How I'm currently using WorkFlowy to be more productive
---

# My WorkFlowy strategy



Are you new to WorkFlowy?

I have a few strategies.

To clear up, MultiFlow is really useful! Open a few panels and navigate to the relevant projects, then copy and paste stuff out.

To stay clear, every project has an “Inbox”.

```tree
+- Some project              <-- this is the project
  +- Inbox: [Some project]   <-- this is the inbox (it also links to the project!)
  | +- Idea 1
  | +- Idea 2
  +- Some node
  +- Another node
  +- ...
```

An Inbox is a top level node where I dump messy thinking and ideas.

It contains a label “Inbox” as well as a link to the parent node (will explain why in a minute!).

I then mirror inboxes from projects to my main to do list:

```tree
+- Todos
  +- Today
  | +- Tidy the house 
  | +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]
    +- Inbox: [Another project]
    +- ...
```

If I want to add stuff to a project, I just toggle the inbox open and add the ideas:

```tree
+- Todos
  +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]  <-- open Inbox without moving away
    | +- Idea 1
    | +- Idea 2
    | +- Another new idea!    <-- then add thoughts as I have them
    +- Inbox: [Another project]
    +- ...
```

And if I think I need to work on the actual project, I can click the link:

```tree
+- Todos
  +- ...
  +- Inboxes
    +- Inbox: [Some project]  <-- click the link
    | +- Idea 1
    | +- Idea 2
    | +- Another new idea!
    +- ...
```

And the project becomes the main tree:

```tree
+- Some project
  +- Inbox: [Some project]
  | +- Idea 1
  | +- Idea 2
  | +- Another new idea!
  +- Some node
  +- Another node
  +- ...
```

A little off topic but have
