content/index.md, before:

---
title: Web Developer + Indie Maker
breadcrumb: Home
description: Online portfolio of Dave Stewart; Open Source, commercial + personal projects
layout: home
media:
  gallery:
    - ./home-splash.svg
    - ./products/todo-emojis/images/todo-emojis-logo.png
    - ./products/got-paper/images/ph-splash.png
    - ./products/control-space/images/cs-splash.png
    - ./products/workflowy-multiflow/images/multiflow-featured.svg
    - ./projects/open-source/alias-hq/images/alias-featured.png
    - ./projects/open-source/vue-class-store/images/vue-class-store.png
    - ./projects/open-source/vuex-pathify/images/vuex-pathify.png
    - ./projects/personal/likely-logic/images/likely-logic.png
    - ./projects/personal/branding/images/featured-hi-res.svg
    - ./work/clearbank/images/clearbank-logo-light.png
    - ./work/fairsquare/images/fairsquare-logo.png
    - ./work/finsbury/images/finsbury-logo-dark.png
---

I work mainly in [fintech](/work/) building Vue JS applications, following years of commercial [agency](/archive/work/) work.

I'm most well known for my [open](/projects/open-source/) [source](/archive/projects/tools/) [libraries](/archive/projects/open-source/) and I keep myself fresh with [personal projects](/search/?text=%2Fpersonal&sort=path&view=image).

Right now I'm full time on [consumer products](/products/).

## Site map

Jump quickly to:

<PageList :pages="$parent.$parent.tree"/>


## Also

Feel free to:

- [Search](/search/) the site
- [Contact](/bio/profiles.md) me

Cheers!

<SiteIcon fill="#ea4848" style="width: 37px; height: 37px;"/>

Commit message:

Update Home page and Site Map

content/index.md, after:

---
title: Web Developer + Indie Maker
breadcrumb: Home
description: Online portfolio of Dave Stewart; Open Source, commercial + personal projects
layout: home
media:
  gallery:
    - ./products/control-space/images/cs-logo.svg
    - ./products/todo-emojis/images/todo-emojis-logo.png
    - ./products/got-paper/images/ph-splash.png
    - ./products/workflowy-multiflow/images/multiflow-featured.svg
    - ./projects/open-source/alias-hq/images/alias-featured.png
    - ./projects/open-source/vue-class-store/images/vue-class-store.png
    - ./projects/open-source/vuex-pathify/images/vuex-pathify.png
    - ./projects/personal/likely-logic/images/likely-logic.png
    - ./projects/personal/branding/images/featured-hi-res.svg
    - ./work/clearbank/images/clearbank-logo-light.png
    - ./work/fairsquare/images/fairsquare-logo.png
    - ./work/finsbury/images/finsbury-logo-dark.png
    - ./blog/work/project-estimation/images/estimation-featured.png

---

A UK web app developer, currently building [Control Space](/products/control-space).

I'm a colourful mix of technical and creative with a passion for [products](/products/), side [projects](/projects/) and [invention](/archive/projects/).

<MediaGallery media="gallery" scale />

If you're here for my _work_-work, these days it's [web apps](/work/) and was previously [web sites](/archive/work/) and [animation](/archive/work/animation/).

---

If you need help to click, here's my last six months' posts:

<keep-alive>
  <HomeRecent />
</keep-alive>

And I've restarted [writing](/blog/) which I absolutely love; expect clear, researched and actionable posts!

If you still haven't clicked, check out the [sitemap](/sitemap/) or [search](/search/) the site.

And if you want to talk, don't hesitate to get in [contact](/contact/).

Cheers!

<SiteIcon fill="#ea4848" style="width: 37px; height: 37px;"/>
