content/blog/work/extension-versioning/index.md, before:

---
preview: true
shortTitle: Versioning and releasing large Chrome extensions
description: How to plan and implement a robust versioning scheme without Semver
media:
  opengraph: ./versioning-featured.png
  featured: ./versioning-featured.png
  thumbnail: ./versioning-thumb.png
---

# Versioning and release strategy for large Chrome extensions

## Abstract

I've been developing Chrome extensions for the last few years, and whilst most don't need a lengthy development phase, if you want to develop `alpha` or `beta` versions, the limitations of Chrome's [manifest version](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/manifest/version/) (in comparison to [Semver](https://nodesource.com/blog/semver-a-primer/)'s more flexible schema) can trip you up.

This post recaps my journey through poorly-executed versioning, awkward naming, tagging and releases, to final robust versioning strategy whilst developing [Control Space](https://controlspace.app).

<NavToc type="tree" 
        level="2,3"
        prompt="The article is longer than I wanted, so feel free to jump to"
        exclude="abstract,control-space-sprint-16"
/>  

## Chrome extension version format

### Intro

The [version string](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/manifest/version/) in Chrome extensions may contain 1 to 4 integers:

```
major
major.minor
major.minor.patch
major.minor.patch.build
```

It cannot contain text so indicating `-alpha` or `-beta` releases is problematic.

As a fallback, you can use a "version name" but that doesn't fix the numerical conundrum:

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.4.0",
  "version_name": "Control Space 1.0 (Beta 4)"
}
```

_For those unfamiliar with the `build` unit, it is intended to be a number that is incremented each time there is a build. Ideally it is set in CI and is used to reference a snapshot of a particular state of the code, no matter the version._

### Prerelease numbering

Numbering pre-releases in Chrome can be problematic if you plan badly, or misjudge your launch timeline.

If you make the mistake of setting `1.0` too early and have published on the Chrome Web Store, you can't replace it with a revised, lower version because the Web Store won't accept it.

As such, if your aim is a neat-and-tidy `1.0` release (more on this [later](#stepping-outside-the-semver-box)) you're going to have to stick to `0.x.y` versions. If you screw up and go to `1.0` too early you then may need to hack the `patch` or `build` units (like I did for too long):

| Semver        | Chrome    | Chrome (hack) | Work                    |
|---------------|-----------|---------------|-------------------------|
| `0.0.0`       | `0.0.0.1` |               | Initial commit          |
| `0.1.0`       | `0.1.0.2` |               | Prerelease work         |
| `1.0.0-alpha` | `0.1.1.3` | `1.0.0.3`     | Begin work on Version 1 |
| `1.0.0-beta`  | `0.1.2.4` | `1.0.1.4`     |                         |
| `1.0.0-rc`    | `0.1.3.5` | `1.0.2.5`     |                         |
| `1.0.0`       | `1.0.0.6` | `1.0.3.6`     | Release Version 1       |

### The problems of thinking in Semver

If you're thinking in terms of Semver, the lack of prerelease labels has drawbacks:

- you can't identify “beta” versions i.e. `1.0.0-beta-05`
- you can't move from `alpha` to `beta` or `rc` as the format doesn't support it
- you may have to abuse to `minor`, `patch` or `build` units to achieve your goals

Additionally:

- version strings for new features may always be out of date:
  - let's say you've released with manifest version `1.0.0`
  - you start working and committing code for the `2.0.0` version
  - as there's no way to specify `2.0.0-beta` the manifest states `1.0.0` although the code is technically `2.0`-ish
- Git tags are ambiguous:
  - when I was thinking in terms of a protracted "beta" phase, I used a mix of Chrome `x.y.z.0` manifest versions and Semver `vX.Y.Z.beta-N` Git tags, so up until some theoretical `1.0` release, the two would _never_ align
- it’s confusing for everyone:
  - tagging releases, generating release notes and creating zips was an ongoing headache as there was no clear system on how the incompatible formats were supposed to marry-up

## Versioning

### Context

To give some context to the rest of the article, let's review the various versioning touchpoints.

There are terms and values to keep track of:

- manifest `version`, e.g. `1.0.0.n`
- potential manifest `version_name`, e.g. `Control Space 1.0`
- Git `tags`, e.g. `v1.0.0`

Which may be used in the following places:

- Chrome extension manifest
- local build scripts
- zipped extension files (sent to testers or uploaded to the store)
- one or more unzipped extension folders used for local browser testing
- changelog
- release notes
- GitHub issues
- marketing communications
- Chrome web store page
- extension options page
- support tickets

As you can see, it's critical to settle on a **straightforward and robust** system that needs no additional interpretation.


### Stepping outside the semver box

I spent a good few days [researching](#resources), strategizing and testing ways to move to a new versioning paradigm and build pipeline, and ultimately realised that I had boxed myself in thinking in Semver terms in a Chrome Versioned world.

The epiphany was realising that focusing on `major` and `beta` monikers (aka "breaking changes" and "pre-releases") was **missing the point** as I was building _a product not a library_; fixating on how to satisfy these library-oriented constraints was the cause of **all** related versioning woes:

- there isn’t really a concept of a “breaking change" in most products:
  - using a `major` version bump as a signal to “review before moving forwards” means nothing to users
  - factoring-out the use of `major` checkpoints misses an opportunity to communicate additional information

- the idea of "alpha" and “beta” doesn’t make sense; builds are either:
  - private, i.e. a zip file with testers
  - public, i.e. the extension on the web store

- juggling named versions and `.beta-nn` monikers is confusing:
  - for end users it's the `major` version that matters, i.e. "do I have the newest features?"
  - for beta testers it’s the `build`, i.e. "is there something for me to review?"

The other big issue was that being in (air-quotes) "beta" for so long, there was no incentive to publicly release until I felt the product was (air-quotes) "one-dot-oh" ready. What I should have done was concentrate on regular stable releases, and communicated properly what each release was about.

## Bringing it all together

### Versioning scheme

Given the above, I concluded:

- counting up to `1.0` (i.e. `alpha`, `beta`) serves no practical purpose
- there is no such thing as a `beta-nn`, there are just "sprints" and releases 
- `major` versions would be better-used to represent "product goals", rather than "breaking changes"
- without `major` version constraints, `minor` versions (i.e. features) have more meaning within the release
- features will be released only when it makes sense, so an initial release could be `x.5.2` (vs an aligned `x.0.0`)
- there is no requirement to consider `beta` private and `n.0.0` public; it's either with testers or users
- the `build` unit identifies which release is the most recent, no matter what the other units

So for a real product like [Control Space](https://controlspace.app/) how does that look?

| Unit    | What for          | Example                                             |
|:--------|:------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| `major` | Sprint            | "Improve window management"                         |
| `minor` | Feature           | "Add context menu to window header"                 |
| `patch` | Fix (on `main`)   | "Fix Settings panel CSS bug"                        |
| `build` | PRs / test builds | "Send build to testers to try out new context menu" |

I decided I wanted to move to this new versioning scheme *immediately*:

- what had been `1.0.16.0` (`1.0 Beta 16`) would jump to `16.0.0`
- individual features would now have proper `minor` homes in `16.1`, `16.2`, etc
- fixes could now be properly recognised with `patch` releases, i.e. `15.0.1`
- the ever-incrementing `build` identifier would remove ambiguity from Web Store submissions

### Branching strategy

The reality of moving away from a Beta-oriented (i.e. private) workflow to more regular public releases and product sprint cycles has made me decide to switch from [trunk-based](https://www.atlassian.com/continuous-delivery/continuous-integration/trunk-based-development) development to [Gitflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/gitflow-workflow).

Though it might be seen as unfashionable in the era of CI, I think this should allow me to patch the currently-released major version more easily; `main` is the released version, `develop` is the current sprint.

As there is only me on the project, I don't foresee this posing any problems.

### Release strategy

Being in a never-ending Beta means that often, projects don't end; it's just a constant feeding of issues through the pipe, piling yet more tickets into a hungry GitHub Projects "Todo" column.

Moving forwards, I think it should be much easier to plan sprints and identify what goes in and what gets left.

This should hopefully result in clearer product releases where a single feature-set is executed on, and the communication and marketing around that should be simpler as well, for example:

> August 2023
> 
> ### Control Space – Sprint 16
> 
> Polished setup, help and first-use experience ready for public release


## Updating versions

### Updating the major version

As part of trying to tally a version with a sprint, I am experimenting with updating the `major` version at the _start of the sprint_ rather than **the release of the feature**.

Taking the “Improve window management” project example above, I might update the manifest from `15.1.0` to `16.0.0` as soon as I create the branch. This means that features should _at least_ show the correct `major` version (aligning to the current sprint) rather than being linked to `15.1.0` as they might be otherwise.

Additionally, as there's no longer a requirement to plot intercept courses to `x.0.0` versions, features will be released _as it makes sense to release them_, so the first public release for a sprint branch may be something like `16.3.0`, with additional `minor` releases / features following as they are completed.

### Updating the build version

For clarity up until now I have omitted the `build` version, but in this new paradigm, we might start with:

```
16.0.0.123 (number of closed issues)
```

I've created a script to bump version units, which I can run manually as I commit and push features, as well as hook it up to a GitHub Action which bumps the `build` each time a PR is merged.

Additionally, I could run multiple *local* builds for testers, so the final versions for the `16.x` builds might look like:

```
16.0.0.123
16.1.0.124
16.2.0.125
16.3.0.126
16.3.0.127
16.3.0.128
```

Even though only the final `16.3.128` version might be merged.

### Fixing bugs and updating the patch version

Fixing bugs should be fairly straightforward by branching off `main`.

The main thing to check is that build numbers between branches are reconciled:

- when committing the fix in `main`, ensure`build` matches the latest in `feature`
- when merging the fix to `feature`, ensure the latest `build` is used

Though, if you forget it doesn't matter as the overall version strings should always be different.

Note that the versioning for a theoretical CSS fix in the live `15.x` branch bug might go like this:

| Branch    | Version      | Work                                              | Change                      | 
|-----------|--------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------| 
| `main`    | `15.0.0.123` | Feature 15 is live                                | -                           | 
| `feature` | `16.0.0.123` | Start "Window Management" project                 | `major`                     | 
| `feature` | `16.1.0.124` | Add "Context menu" feature                        | `minor` `build`             | 
| `main`    | `15.0.1.125` | **Fix some CSS issue** (update `build` to latest) | `patch` `build` and release | 
| `feature` | `16.1.0.125` | **Pull in the fix** (ensure latest `build`)       | -                           | 
| `feature` | `16.2.0.126` | Add feature                                       | `minor` `build`             | 
| `feature` | `16.2.0.127` | Ready to release                                  | `build` and release         | 

The final releases would be:

- `15.0.0.123` on `main`
- `15.0.1.125` which adds the CSS fix
- `16.2.1.127` which adds the the `16.x` branch along with the fix

And the incrementing `build` should ensure identical versions are never uploaded to the Chrome Web Store!

### Changelogs vs release notes

In recent years I've' switched from [changelogs](https://keepachangelog.com/) to [release notes](https://www.launchnotes.com/blog/release-notes-examples).

Changelogs are good for developers but no good for customers or marketing as they are too technical and granular. A user doesn't care that you "refactored some component" they care that you "added support for context menus".

And creating release notes at the end of a sprint from `changelog.md` is hard, as you've forgotten the context a month or so later. I prefer to just update the release notes for the sprint as I commit the feature:

> Windows
> 
> - added support for context menus
> - made shortcut keys combos clearer
>
> Tabs
> 
> - ...

If and when the notes make it into your public-facing site, they are much easier to work from in this format.

Also, for developers, GitHub already provides a neat log of [changes](https://github.com/octocat/linguist/compare/v2.2.0...octocat:v2.3.3) between releases by [comparing commits](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/committing-changes-to-your-project/viewing-and-comparing-commits/comparing-commits).

## A few last thoughts

### How do other extensions handle versioning?

Looking at my Extensions page, I was interested to see which extensions had larger `major` build numbers.

Creating a new profile, I installed around 20 of the most popular extensions, and ordered by `version` string:  

| Extension                                                                                          | Users | Size   | Builder  | Major | Minor | Patch | Build |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|--------|----------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| [Lighthouse](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/blipmdconlkpinefehnmjammfjpmpbjk)           | 1m    | 27 KB  | Bundler  | 100   | 0     | 0     | 0     |
| [Honey](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/bmnlcjabgnpnenekpadlanbbkooimhnj)                | 10m+  | 4.5 MB | Compiled | 16    | 1     | 2     |       |
| [Grammarly](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/kbfnbcaeplbcioakkpcpgfkobkghlhen)            | 10m+  | 37 MB  | Webpack  | 14    | 1118  | 0     |       |
| [Todoist](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/jldhpllghnbhlbpcmnajkpdmadaolakh)              | 700K  | 85 KB  | -        | 11    | 1     |       |       |
| [Octotree](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/bkhaagjahfmjljalopjnoealnfndnagc)             | 300K  | 3.4 MB | Bundler  | 7     | 9     | 3     |       |
| [Loom](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/liecbddmkiiihnedobmlmillhodjkdmb)                 | 5m    | 13 MB  | Webpack  | 5     | 5     | 26    |       |
| [Google Keep](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/lpcaedmchfhocbbapmcbpinfpgnhiddi)          | 6m    | 4 MB   | Closure  | 4     | 23312 | 540   | 1     |
| [LastPass](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/hdokiejnpimakedhajhdlcegeplioahd)             | 10m+  | 55 MB  | Webpack  | 4     | 119   | 0     |       |
| [Tampermonkey](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/dhdgffkkebhmkfjojejmpbldmpobfkfo)         | 10m+  | 1.5 MB | Bundler  | 4     | 19    | 0     |       |
| [Dark Reader](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/eimadpbcbfnmbkopoojfekhnkhdbieeh)          | 5m    | 600 KB | -        | 4     | 9     | 64    |       |
| [Save to Pocket](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/niloccemoadcdkdjlinkgdfekeahmflj)       | 2m    | 356 KB | Bundler  | 4     | 0     | 6     |       |
| [Save to Google Drive](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gmbmikajjgmnabiglmofipeabaddhgne) | 3m    | 650 KB | Closure  | 3     | 0     | 4     |       |
| [Momentum](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/laookkfknpbbblfpciffpaejjkokdgca)             | 3m    | 14MB   | Bundler  | 2     | 10    | 0     |       |
| [Google Translate](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/aapbdbdomjkkjkaonfhkkikfgjllcleb)     | 10m+  | 236 KB | Closure  | 2     | 0     | 13    |       |
| [OneTab](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/chphlpgkkbolifaimnlloiipkdnihall)               | 2m    | 1.2 MB | Bundler  | 1     | 76    |       |       |
| [Google Docs](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/ghbmnnjooekpmoecnnnilnnbdlolhkhi)          | 10m+  | 88 KB  | Closure  | 1     | 65    | 0     |       |
| [Zoom](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/kgjfgplpablkjnlkjmjdecgdpfankdle)                 | 7m    | 240 KB | Bundler  | 1     | 8     | 20    |       |

I'm not sure how conclusive this is – but perhaps it reveals that more extension developers might reconsider their versioning scheme!

### Resources

Lastly, here are some links to the resources which helped me reach a conclusion on my own versioning strategy:

- [What exactly is the build number in MAJOR.MINOR.BUILDNUMBER.REVISION](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/24987/what-exactly-is-the-build-number-in-major-minor-buildnumber-revision)
- [When do you change your major/minor/patch version number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/166215/when-do-you-change-your-major-minor-patch-version-number)
- [How/When should I update the version number?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57941183/how-when-should-i-update-the-version-number)
- [When should I increment version number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/215163/when-should-i-increment-version-number)
- [When to increment build number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/421299/when-to-increment-build-number#:~:text=You%20increment%20the%20build%20number,change%20of%20your%20source%20code.)
- [How often should you ship your product releases](https://nikhilmehta.me/product-release/)
- [Semantic Versioning with CI/CD and semantic-release](https://semaphoreci.com/blog/semantic-versioning-cicd)

Commit message:

Add summary to versioning article

content/blog/work/extension-versioning/index.md, after:

---
preview: true
shortTitle: Versioning and releasing large Chrome extensions
description: How to plan and implement a robust versioning scheme without Semver
media:
  opengraph: ./versioning-featured.png
  featured: ./versioning-featured.png
  thumbnail: ./versioning-thumb.png
---

# Versioning and release strategy for large Chrome extensions

## Abstract

I've been developing Chrome extensions for the last few years, and whilst most don't need a lengthy development phase, if you want to develop `alpha` or `beta` versions, the limitations of Chrome's [manifest version](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/manifest/version/) (in comparison to [Semver](https://nodesource.com/blog/semver-a-primer/)'s more flexible schema) can trip you up.

This post recaps my journey through poorly-executed versioning, awkward naming, tagging and releases, to final robust versioning strategy whilst developing [Control Space](https://controlspace.app).

<NavToc type="tree" 
        level="2,3"
        prompt="The article is longer than I wanted, so feel free to jump to"
        exclude="abstract,control-space-sprint-16"
/>  

## Chrome extension version format

### Intro

The [version string](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/extensions/mv3/manifest/version/) in Chrome extensions may contain 1 to 4 integers:

```
major
major.minor
major.minor.patch
major.minor.patch.build
```

It cannot contain text so indicating `-alpha` or `-beta` releases is problematic.

As a fallback, you can use a "version name" but that doesn't fix the numerical conundrum:

```json
{
  "version": "1.0.4.0",
  "version_name": "Control Space 1.0 (Beta 4)"
}
```

_For those unfamiliar with the `build` unit, it is intended to be a number that is incremented each time there is a build. Ideally it is set in CI and is used to reference a snapshot of a particular state of the code, no matter the version._

### Prerelease numbering

Numbering pre-releases in Chrome can be problematic if you plan badly, or misjudge your launch timeline.

If you make the mistake of setting `1.0` too early and have published on the Chrome Web Store, you can't replace it with a revised, lower version because the Web Store won't accept it.

As such, if your aim is a neat-and-tidy `1.0` release (more on this [later](#stepping-outside-the-semver-box)) you're going to have to stick to `0.x.y` versions. If you screw up and go to `1.0` too early you then may need to hack the `patch` or `build` units (like I did for too long):

| Semver        | Chrome    | Chrome (hack) | Work                    |
|---------------|-----------|---------------|-------------------------|
| `0.0.0`       | `0.0.0.1` |               | Initial commit          |
| `0.1.0`       | `0.1.0.2` |               | Prerelease work         |
| `1.0.0-alpha` | `0.1.1.3` | `1.0.0.3`     | Begin work on Version 1 |
| `1.0.0-beta`  | `0.1.2.4` | `1.0.1.4`     |                         |
| `1.0.0-rc`    | `0.1.3.5` | `1.0.2.5`     |                         |
| `1.0.0`       | `1.0.0.6` | `1.0.3.6`     | Release Version 1       |

### The problems of thinking in Semver

If you're thinking in terms of Semver, the lack of prerelease labels has drawbacks:

- you can't identify “beta” versions i.e. `1.0.0-beta-05`
- you can't move from `alpha` to `beta` or `rc` as the format doesn't support it
- you may have to abuse to `minor`, `patch` or `build` units to achieve your goals

Additionally:

- version strings for new features may always be out of date:
  - let's say you've released with manifest version `1.0.0`
  - you start working and committing code for the `2.0.0` version
  - as there's no way to specify `2.0.0-beta` the manifest states `1.0.0` although the code is technically `2.0`-ish
- Git tags are ambiguous:
  - when I was thinking in terms of a protracted "beta" phase, I used a mix of Chrome `x.y.z.0` manifest versions and Semver `vX.Y.Z.beta-N` Git tags, so up until some theoretical `1.0` release, the two would _never_ align
- it’s confusing for everyone:
  - tagging releases, generating release notes and creating zips was an ongoing headache as there was no clear system on how the incompatible formats were supposed to marry-up

## Versioning

### Context

To give some context to the rest of the article, let's review the various versioning touchpoints.

There are terms and values to keep track of:

- manifest `version`, e.g. `1.0.0.n`
- potential manifest `version_name`, e.g. `Control Space 1.0`
- Git `tags`, e.g. `v1.0.0`

Which may be used in the following places:

- Chrome extension manifest
- local build scripts
- zipped extension files (sent to testers or uploaded to the store)
- one or more unzipped extension folders used for local browser testing
- changelog
- release notes
- GitHub issues
- marketing communications
- Chrome web store page
- extension options page
- support tickets

As you can see, it's critical to settle on a **straightforward and robust** system that needs no additional interpretation.


### Stepping outside the semver box

I spent a good few days [researching](#resources), strategizing and testing ways to move to a new versioning paradigm and build pipeline, and ultimately realised that I had boxed myself in thinking in Semver terms in a Chrome Versioned world.

The epiphany was realising that focusing on `major` and `beta` monikers (aka "breaking changes" and "pre-releases") was **missing the point** as I was building _a product not a library_; fixating on how to satisfy these library-oriented constraints was the cause of **all** related versioning woes:

- there isn’t really a concept of a “breaking change" in most products:
  - using a `major` version bump as a signal to “review before moving forwards” means nothing to users
  - factoring-out the use of `major` checkpoints misses an opportunity to communicate additional information

- the idea of "alpha" and “beta” doesn’t make sense; builds are either:
  - private, i.e. a zip file with testers
  - public, i.e. the extension on the web store

- juggling named versions and `.beta-nn` monikers is confusing:
  - for end users it's the `major` version that matters, i.e. "do I have the newest features?"
  - for beta testers it’s the `build`, i.e. "is there something for me to review?"

The other big issue was that being in (air-quotes) "beta" for so long, there was no incentive to publicly release until I felt the product was (air-quotes) "one-dot-oh" ready. What I should have done was concentrate on regular stable releases, and communicated properly what each release was about.

## Bringing it all together

### Versioning scheme

Given the above, I concluded:

- counting down to `1.0` (i.e. `alpha`, `beta`) serves no practical purpose
- there is no such thing as a `beta-nn`, there are just "sprints" and releases 
- `major` versions would be better-used to represent "product goals", rather than "breaking changes"
- without `major` version constraints, `minor` versions (i.e. features) have more meaning within the release
- features will be released only when it makes sense, so an initial release could be `x.5.2` (vs an aligned `x.0.0`)
- there is no requirement to consider `beta` private and `n.0.0` public; it's either with testers or users
- the `build` unit identifies which release is the most recent, no matter what the other units

So for a real product like [Control Space](https://controlspace.app/) how does that look?

| Unit    | What for          | Example                                             |
|:--------|:------------------|:----------------------------------------------------|
| `major` | Sprint            | "Improve window management"                         |
| `minor` | Feature           | "Add context menu to window header"                 |
| `patch` | Fix (on `main`)   | "Fix Settings panel CSS bug"                        |
| `build` | PRs / test builds | "Send build to testers to try out new context menu" |

I decided I wanted to move to this new versioning scheme *immediately*:

- what had been `1.0.16.0` (`1.0 Beta 16`) would jump to `16.0.0`
- individual features would now have proper `minor` homes in `16.1`, `16.2`, etc
- fixes could now be properly recognised with `patch` releases, i.e. `15.0.1`
- the ever-incrementing `build` identifier would remove ambiguity from Web Store submissions

### Branching strategy

The reality of moving away from a Beta-oriented (i.e. private) workflow to more regular public releases and product sprint cycles has made me decide to switch from [trunk-based](https://www.atlassian.com/continuous-delivery/continuous-integration/trunk-based-development) development to [Gitflow](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/comparing-workflows/gitflow-workflow).

Though it might be seen as unfashionable in the era of CI, I think this should allow me to patch the currently-released major version more easily; `main` is the released version, `develop` is the current sprint.

As there is only me on the project, I don't foresee this posing any problems.

### Release strategy

Being in a never-ending Beta means that often, projects don't end; it's just a constant feeding of issues through the pipe, piling yet more tickets into a hungry GitHub Projects "Todo" column.

Moving forwards, I think it should be much easier to plan sprints and identify what goes in and what gets left.

This should hopefully result in clearer product releases where a single feature-set is executed on, and the communication and marketing around that should be simpler as well, for example:

> August 2023
> 
> ### Control Space – Sprint 16
> 
> Polished setup, help and first-use experience ready for public release


## Updating versions

### Updating the major version

As part of trying to tally a version with a sprint, I am experimenting with updating the `major` version at the _start of the sprint_ rather than **the release of the feature**.

Taking the “Improve window management” project example above, I might update the manifest from `15.1.0` to `16.0.0` as soon as I create the branch. This means that features should _at least_ show the correct `major` version (aligning to the current sprint) rather than being linked to `15.1.0` as they might be otherwise.

Additionally, as there's no longer a requirement to plot intercept courses to `x.0.0` versions, features will be released _as it makes sense to release them_, so the first public release for a sprint branch may be something like `16.3.0`, with additional `minor` releases / features following as they are completed.

### Updating the build version

For clarity up until now I have omitted the `build` version, but in this new paradigm, we might start with:

```
16.0.0.123 (number of closed issues)
```

I've created a script to bump version units, which I can run manually as I commit and push features, as well as hook it up to a GitHub Action which bumps the `build` each time a PR is merged.

Additionally, I could run multiple *local* builds for testers, so the final versions for the `16.x` builds might look like:

```
16.0.0.123
16.1.0.124
16.2.0.125
16.3.0.126
16.3.0.127
16.3.0.128
```

Even though only the final `16.3.128` version might be merged.

### Fixing bugs and updating the patch version

Fixing bugs should be fairly straightforward by branching off `main`.

The main thing to check is that build numbers between branches are reconciled:

- when committing the fix in `main`, ensure`build` matches the latest in `feature`
- when merging the fix to `feature`, ensure the latest `build` is used

Though, if you forget it doesn't matter as the overall version strings should always be different.

Note that the versioning for a theoretical CSS fix in the live `15.x` branch bug might go like this:

| Branch    | Version      | Work                                              | Change                      | 
|-----------|--------------|---------------------------------------------------|-----------------------------| 
| `main`    | `15.0.0.123` | Feature 15 is live                                | -                           | 
| `feature` | `16.0.0.123` | Start "Window Management" project                 | `major`                     | 
| `feature` | `16.1.0.124` | Add "Context menu" feature                        | `minor` `build`             | 
| `main`    | `15.0.1.125` | **Fix some CSS issue** (update `build` to latest) | `patch` `build` and release | 
| `feature` | `16.1.0.125` | **Pull in the fix** (ensure latest `build`)       | -                           | 
| `feature` | `16.2.0.126` | Add feature                                       | `minor` `build`             | 
| `feature` | `16.2.0.127` | Ready to release                                  | `build` and release         | 

The final releases would be:

- `15.0.0.123` on `main`
- `15.0.1.125` which adds the CSS fix
- `16.2.1.127` which adds the the `16.x` branch along with the fix

And the incrementing `build` should ensure identical versions are never uploaded to the Chrome Web Store!

### Changelogs vs release notes

In recent years I've' switched from [changelogs](https://keepachangelog.com/) to [release notes](https://www.launchnotes.com/blog/release-notes-examples).

Changelogs are good for developers but no good for customers or marketing as they are too technical and granular. A user doesn't care that you "refactored some component" they care that you "added support for context menus".

And creating release notes at the end of a sprint from `changelog.md` is hard, as you've forgotten the context a month or so later. I prefer to just update the release notes for the sprint as I commit the feature:

> Windows
> 
> - added support for context menus
> - made shortcut keys combos clearer
>
> Tabs
> 
> - ...

If and when the notes make it into your public-facing site, they are much easier to work from in this format.

Also, for developers, GitHub already provides a neat log of [changes](https://github.com/octocat/linguist/compare/v2.2.0...octocat:v2.3.3) between releases by [comparing commits](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/committing-changes-to-your-project/viewing-and-comparing-commits/comparing-commits).

### Summary

Just to recap:

- Think `sprint.feature.fix.build` vs `major.minor.fix.build`
- The `major` version identifies the *start* (rather than the end) of the work
- Versions count *from* (rather than to) the next `major` version
- Work is *private* until *publicly* released
- Release the first `minor` version that fulfils the promise of a coherent release
- Release additional `minor` and `patch` releases as required
- Use `build` versions to disambiguate changes whilst testing

## A few last thoughts

### How do other extensions handle versioning?

Looking at my Extensions page, I was interested to see which extensions had larger `major` build numbers.

Creating a new profile, I installed around 20 of the most popular extensions, and ordered by `version` string:  

| Extension                                                                                          | Users | Size   | Builder  | Major | Minor | Patch | Build |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------|--------|----------|-------|-------|-------|-------|
| [Lighthouse](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/blipmdconlkpinefehnmjammfjpmpbjk)           | 1m    | 27 KB  | Bundler  | 100   | 0     | 0     | 0     |
| [Honey](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/bmnlcjabgnpnenekpadlanbbkooimhnj)                | 10m+  | 4.5 MB | Compiled | 16    | 1     | 2     |       |
| [Grammarly](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/kbfnbcaeplbcioakkpcpgfkobkghlhen)            | 10m+  | 37 MB  | Webpack  | 14    | 1118  | 0     |       |
| [Todoist](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/jldhpllghnbhlbpcmnajkpdmadaolakh)              | 700K  | 85 KB  | -        | 11    | 1     |       |       |
| [Octotree](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/bkhaagjahfmjljalopjnoealnfndnagc)             | 300K  | 3.4 MB | Bundler  | 7     | 9     | 3     |       |
| [Loom](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/liecbddmkiiihnedobmlmillhodjkdmb)                 | 5m    | 13 MB  | Webpack  | 5     | 5     | 26    |       |
| [Google Keep](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/lpcaedmchfhocbbapmcbpinfpgnhiddi)          | 6m    | 4 MB   | Closure  | 4     | 23312 | 540   | 1     |
| [LastPass](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/hdokiejnpimakedhajhdlcegeplioahd)             | 10m+  | 55 MB  | Webpack  | 4     | 119   | 0     |       |
| [Tampermonkey](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/dhdgffkkebhmkfjojejmpbldmpobfkfo)         | 10m+  | 1.5 MB | Bundler  | 4     | 19    | 0     |       |
| [Dark Reader](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/eimadpbcbfnmbkopoojfekhnkhdbieeh)          | 5m    | 600 KB | -        | 4     | 9     | 64    |       |
| [Save to Pocket](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/niloccemoadcdkdjlinkgdfekeahmflj)       | 2m    | 356 KB | Bundler  | 4     | 0     | 6     |       |
| [Save to Google Drive](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/gmbmikajjgmnabiglmofipeabaddhgne) | 3m    | 650 KB | Closure  | 3     | 0     | 4     |       |
| [Momentum](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/laookkfknpbbblfpciffpaejjkokdgca)             | 3m    | 14MB   | Bundler  | 2     | 10    | 0     |       |
| [Google Translate](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/aapbdbdomjkkjkaonfhkkikfgjllcleb)     | 10m+  | 236 KB | Closure  | 2     | 0     | 13    |       |
| [OneTab](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/chphlpgkkbolifaimnlloiipkdnihall)               | 2m    | 1.2 MB | Bundler  | 1     | 76    |       |       |
| [Google Docs](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/ghbmnnjooekpmoecnnnilnnbdlolhkhi)          | 10m+  | 88 KB  | Closure  | 1     | 65    | 0     |       |
| [Zoom](https://chrome.google.com/webstore/detail/kgjfgplpablkjnlkjmjdecgdpfankdle)                 | 7m    | 240 KB | Bundler  | 1     | 8     | 20    |       |

I'm not sure how conclusive this is – but perhaps it reveals that more extension developers might reconsider their versioning scheme!

### Resources

Lastly, here are some links to the resources which helped me reach a conclusion on my own versioning strategy:

- [What exactly is the build number in MAJOR.MINOR.BUILDNUMBER.REVISION](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/24987/what-exactly-is-the-build-number-in-major-minor-buildnumber-revision)
- [When do you change your major/minor/patch version number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/166215/when-do-you-change-your-major-minor-patch-version-number)
- [How/When should I update the version number?](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/57941183/how-when-should-i-update-the-version-number)
- [When should I increment version number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/215163/when-should-i-increment-version-number)
- [When to increment build number?](https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/421299/when-to-increment-build-number#:~:text=You%20increment%20the%20build%20number,change%20of%20your%20source%20code.)
- [How often should you ship your product releases](https://nikhilmehta.me/product-release/)
- [Semantic Versioning with CI/CD and semantic-release](https://semaphoreci.com/blog/semantic-versioning-cicd)
